Add files documentation articles (#76)
sharetribe/dev-docs: content/concepts/files/files-in-sharetribe/index.mdx

---
title: Files in Sharetribe
sidebarTitle: Files in Sharetribe
description:
  This article describes how files and file attachments work on a
  Sharetribe marketplace.
---

# Files in Sharetribe

Sharetribe supports uploading and downloading files and attaching them
to different marketplace resources.

## Visibility

> A file is first uploaded by creating an `ownFile` resource, which is

Reviewer: How is an `ownFile` resource created?

Author: I rearranged the sections now so that the more basic info on files, file attachments, and file vs ownFile distinction comes before this section – that way, the reader is dealing with familiar concepts once they get this far.

visible to the creator of the resource. An `ownFile` can then be

> attached to another resource – in the first release, to a message via

Reviewer: I'm find I'm more inclined to write the docs to describe the product as is, and leave out references to future releases and features. What do you think?

Author: Fair point! Reworded now

the `message.publicFileAttachments` attribute.

Once a file has been attached to another resource, it is visible as a
`file` resource according to the scope of the corresponding
fileAttachments attribute:

- `publicFileAttachments` are visible to all users who have access to
  the resource in question
- `protectedFileAttachments` are visible to the user who created the
  resource, and additionally the file can be revealed in a transaction
  to the other transaction participant
- `privateFileAttachments` are visible only to the user who created the
  resource.

You can review the
[API reference](https://www.sharetribe.com/api-reference/) to see which
resources have which scopes of file attachments available.

In addition, operators have visibility to files and file attachments in
Console. For example, files attached to messages are visible in the
Console transaction details.

## Permissions

Uploading and downloading files is enabled by default. Operators can

> disable uploading and downloading files across the marketplace in Access

Reviewer: What does disabling uploading and downloading do from a technical point of view, e.g. what endpoints does this restrict? Would this also require an update in this doc: docs/concepts/users-and-authentication/user-access-control-in-sharetribe/

Author: Good call! Added the endpoints in the access control article and linked to the endpoint list from here.

  where the parameter is the `fileAttachment` id

```js
const downloadDetails = isOwnFile
  ? sdk.ownFileDownloads.create({ fileId }).data.data
  : sdk.fileDownloads.create({ fileAttachmentId }).data.data;
```

```json
"downloadDetails": {
  "id": {
    "uuid": "fd76299c-1be6-4250-8de6-10b1d8f9cb9e"
  },
  "type": "fileDownload",
  "attributes": {
    "fileId": {
      "uuid": "69fd8859-8380-49c0-ab7e-0ee502e40811"
    },
    "url": "https://unique-signed-sharetribe-download-url.com",
    "expiresAt": "2026-05-08T08:29:28.089Z"
  }
}
```

Since both upload URLs and download URLs are short-lived, it's not
possible to save them in a resource's extended data for reuse. Both
resources have an `expiresAt` attribute that indicates how long they are
valid.

## Security

(question being answered: how does Sharetribe make sure attackers don't
use files for fraud)

When a file is uploaded, the Sharetribe backend runs a security
verification to ensure that the file is safe to handle and distribute,
for example that it does not have malware. In addition, the backend
verifies that the file mime type is acceptable and the size is less than
1GB.

> 

Reviewer: Should there be a separate section on limitations, e.g. what kind of files can be uploaded? Or is that handled in the API reference?

Author: The template doesn't have an explicit list of allowed files, and the check is made on the API level. I would imagine that the necessary details will be available in the API reference – if that's not the case, then we can for sure amend this part.

Author: Added the same note on potentially harmful executables as in the lifecycle article

---
title: Files in Sharetribe
sidebarTitle: Files in Sharetribe
description:
  This article describes how files and file attachments work on a
  Sharetribe marketplace.
---

# Files in Sharetribe

Sharetribe supports uploading and downloading files and attaching them
to different marketplace resources.

> The file information and relationships to other resources is stored in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The file information and relationships to other resources are stored in
```

the Sharetribe backend and available through the Sharetribe APIs. The
file entities themselves are stored in a third-party storage, and you
need to call the Sharetribe APIs to request unique signed upload and
download URLs to access the actual file entities.

- Call Sharetribe APIs to
  - create a file resource
  - retrieve file information
  - create upload and download URLs for a file resource
  - manage resources with file attachments
- Call Sharetribe storage to
  - upload file using a short-lived upload URL
  - download file using a short-lived download URL

![Files architecture in Sharetribe](./files-architecture.png)

## Permissions

Uploading and downloading files is enabled by default. Operators can
disable uploading and downloading files across the marketplace in Access
control. When uploads and downloads are disabled in Console > General >
Access control,
[file upload and download endpoints](/concepts/users-and-authentication/user-access-control-in-sharetribe/#disabling-file-uploads-and-downloads)
will throw a 403 Forbidden error.

> In addition, you can use for instance listing types to enable or disable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, you can use listing types to enable or disable
```

specific use cases for files in your marketplace, if files are enabled.

For example, to view and use file attachment capabilities in transaction
messages when using the default Sharetribe Web Template, you'll need to

> double check that files are enabled both on the marketplace level and in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
verify that files are enabled both on the marketplace level and in
```

> double check that files are enabled both on the marketplace level and in

Reviewer: is marketplace level ambiguous? Could it be `verify that files are enabled through access control and in the listing type of the...`

              },
              "type": "fileAttachment"
            }
          ]
        }
      }
    }
  ],
  "included": [
    {
      // this is the file resource that has a relationship to fileAttachment
      "id": {
        "uuid": "69fd8859-8380-49c0-ab7e-0ee502e40811"
      },
      "type": "file",
      "attributes": {
        "name": "File to be uploaded.pdf",
        "state": "available",
        "mimeType": "application/pdf",
        "size": 10697,
        "deleted": false
      }
    },
    // This message has one fileAttachment in its publicFileAttachments array
    {
      "id": {
        "uuid": "69fd886a-1924-41c5-bfe1-a43deb7e1c3b"
      },
      "type": "fileAttachment",
      "attributes": {
        "scope": "public",
        "deleted": false
      },
      // file is a relationship to fileAttachment
      "relationships": {
        "file": {
          "data": {
            "id": {
              "uuid": "69fd8859-8380-49c0-ab7e-0ee502e40811"
            },
            "type": "file"
          }
        }
      }
    }
  ],
  "meta": {
    "totalItems": 1,
    "totalPages": 1,
    "page": 1,
    "perPage": 100
  }
}
```

> An operator can delete a file attachment to disconnect a resource from a

Reviewer: Is deleting a file attachment done via the Console?

Author: Simplified the phrasing since the disconnect vs delete file distinction won't be released until the purchase digital files feature.

file, or they can delete the file itself so that all resources linked to
the file lose access. When attaching files to messages, a single file is
only attached to a single message at a time, so when an operator deletes
a file associated with a message, both the `fileAttachment` and the
`file` are deleted.

## file and ownFile

The digital file resource can be represented by two resources: `file`
and `ownFile`.

To fetch a public `file` resource, you'll need to use the id of the
associated `fileAttachment`, as the `fileAttachment` resource contains

> the scope information that informs whether the API caller should have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the scope information that informs whether the API caller has
```

access to the resource.

```js
const file = await sdk.files.show({ fileAttachmentId }).data.data;
```

```json
"file": {
  "id": {
    "uuid": "69fd8859-8380-49c0-ab7e-0ee502e40811"
  },
  "type": "file",
  "attributes": {
    "name": "File to be uploaded.pdf",
    "state": "available",
    "mimeType": "application/pdf",
    "size": 10697,
    "deleted": false
  }
}
```

> There's also an `ownFile` resource, which is the author's expanded

Reviewer: I understand that by "expanded version of the file" it means that the ownFile resource contains more information than the file resource, but "expanded version of the file" in the context of files sounds like unzipping or expanding something in file size.

Author: Fair point! I think the paragraph works without the "expanded" word, too.

version of the file. In addition to the public attributes, the

> `ownFile`resource also shows when the resource was created and when the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ownFile` resource also shows when the resource was created and when the
```

state was updated.

> To fetch an `ownFile`resource, you'll need to use the id of the `file`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To fetch an `ownFile` resource, you'll need to use the id of the `file`
```

> resource, not the file attachment resource.

Reviewer: should this be 
```suggestion
resource, not the `fileAttachment` resource.
```

```js
const ownFile = await sdk.ownFiles.show({ id: fileId }).data.data;
```

```json
"ownFile": {
  "id": {
    "uuid": "69fd8859-8380-49c0-ab7e-0ee502e40811"
  },
  "type": "ownFile",
  "attributes": {
    "name": "File to be uploaded.pdf",
    "mimeType": "application/pdf",
    "size": 10697,
    "state": "available",
    "createdAt": "2026-05-08T06:53:13.091Z",
    "stateUpdatedAt": "2026-05-08T06:53:25.880Z"
  }
}
```

A `file` can be in one of several states:

- pendingUpload
- pendingVerification
- available

> - verificationFailed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- verificationFailed
```
